The Relational Data Model and
Relational Database Constraints

The relational data model was
first introduced by Ted Codd of IBM Research in 1970 in a classic paper (Codd,
1970), and it attracted immediate attention due to its simplicity and mathematical
foundation. The model uses the concept of a mathematical relation—which looks
somewhat like a table of values—as its basic building block, and has its theoretical
basis in set theory and first-order predicate logic.

5.1 Relational Model Concepts

The relational model - represents the database as a collection of relations.

Informally,
each relation resembles a table of values or, to some extent, a flat file of records.

It is
called a flat file because each record has a simple linear or flat structure.

Difference between relations and files:

When a relation is thought of as a table of values, each row in the table represents a
collection of related data values.

A row represents a fact that typically corresponds
to a real-world entity or relationship.

The table name and column names are used
to help to interpret the meaning of the values in each row.

Table name:
i.e. STUDENT tells you what each row will represent facts about.

Column name:
i.e. Class, and Major specify how to interpret the data values in each row, based on the
column each value is in. All values in a column are of the same data type.

Informal = Formal:
row = tuple
header = attribute
table = relation

data type describing the types of values that can appear in each column is represented by a domain of possible values.

domain, tuple, attribute,
and relation—formally*

5.1.1 Domains, Attributes, Tuples, and Relations
Formal Definitions:

DOMAIN
domain - D, set of atomic values. atomic* (recall) - each value is indivisible.
Common way is to specify a data type.  Also useful to specify a name for a domain (to help in interpreting it's values).

Parts of a domain...

- logical definitions of domains:
e.g.
■ Usa_phone_numbers. The set of ten-digit phone numbers valid in the United
States.
■ Employee_ages. Possible ages of employees in a company; each must be an
integer value between 15 and 80.
■ Academic_department_codes. The set of academic department codes, such as
‘CS’, ‘ECON’, and ‘PHYS’.

- data type (or format) is also specified:
e.g.
■ The data type for Usa_phone_numbers can be declared as character string of the form (ddd)ddd-dddd,
where each d is a numeric (decimal) digit and the first three digits form a valid
telephone area code.

■ The data type for Employee_ages is an integer number between
15 and 80.

What's the data type for the Academic_department_codes domain?*

the data type is the set of all character
strings that represent valid department names.

In general, domains have three components name, data type, and format*
Additional information can also be given i.e. units of measurment for a numeric domain
such as pounds or kilograms.

RELATIONS:
Relation schema:
Denoted by R(A1, A2, ..., An)

Components.
■ R - relation name
■- A1, A2, ..., An - list of attributes

■ Ai - each individual attribute, name of a role played by some domain D in the relation schema R.
■ D - domain of Ai (denoted dom(Ai)).

■ The degree (or arity) of a relation is the number of attributes n of it's relation schema.

e.g.
■ STUDENT(Name, Ssn, Home_phone, Address, Office_phone, Age, Gpa)

Using the data type of each attribute, the definition is sometimes written as:
■ STUDENT(Name: string, Ssn: string, Home_phone: string, Address: string, Office_phone: string, Age: integer, Gpa: real)

Questions for the class:
- Given this example what's the relation name? - STUDENT

- What's the degree (or arity) of the relation? - 7

- What's the domain of Home_phone? i.e. dom(Home_phone)? = Usa_phone_numbers

It's possible to refer to the attributes of the relation schema by their position*
- i.e. first attribute of STUDENT relation is what? - Name, etc..

Relation (or relation state) r of relation schema R(A1, A2, ..., An):
denoted r(R) is a set of n-tuples r = {t1, t2, … , tm}.

n-tuple - t ordered list(s) of n values t = <v1, v2, ..., vn>, where each value vi 1<=i<=n is an element of dom(Ai) or the special NULL value.

ith value of tuple t (corresponding to the attribute Ai) is referred to as t[Ai], t.Ai or t[i] (positional notation).

Common terminology:
relation intension - relation schema R
relation extension - relation state r(R)

See figure 5.1...
Figure 5.1 shows an example of a STUDENT relation, which corresponds to the
STUDENT schema just specified. Each tuple in the relation represents a particular
student entity (or object). We display the relation as a table, where each tuple is
shown as a row and each attribute corresponds to a column header indicating a role
or interpretation of the values in that column. NULL values represent attributes
whose values are unknown or do not exist for some individual STUDENT tuple.
(show diagram to class on PDF)...

Formal definition of relation (using set theory)..
relation (or relation state) r(R) is a mathematical relation of
degree n on the domains dom(A1), dom(A2), … , dom(An), which is a subset of the
Cartesian product (denoted by ×) of the domains that define R:



r(R) ⊆ (dom(A1) × dom(A2) × . . . × (dom(An))
The Cartesian product specifies all possible combinations of values from the underlying
domains. 

Hence, if we denote the total number of values, or cardinality, in a
domain D by |D| (assuming that all domains are finite), the total number of tuples
in the Cartesian product is*

|dom(A1)| × |dom(A2)| × . . . × |dom(An)|

This product of cardinalities of all domains represents the total number of possible
instances or tuples that can ever exist in any relation state r(R). Of all these possible
combinations, a relation state at a given time—

- current relation state - reflects
only the valid tuples that represent a particular state of the real world.

- Two facts to know:
in general, as the state of the real world changes, so does the relation state (by being transformed into another relation state).

However, the schema R is relatively static and changes very infrequently —for example, as a result of adding an attribute to represent new information that was not originally stored in the relation.

(Potential Quiz Question based upon the two statements above)*

Nuances*
possible for several attributes to have the same domain.
attribute names indicate different roles - interpretations for that domain.

Characteristics (make it different from a file or a table):
relation - defined as a set of tuples (mathematically elements of a set have no order among them).
Tuples in a relation have no particular order.

File - records are physically stored on disk (or in memory), so there is always an order among the records.
The order represents first, second, ith, and last records in a file.

When we display relations as a table, rows are displayed in a certain order.

Why tuple ordering is not part of definition of relation?*
- Tuple ordering is not part of a relation definition because a relation attempts to represent
facts at a logical or abstract level.

Many tuple orders can be specified on the
same relation. When a relation is implemented as a file or displayed as a table, a particular
ordering may be specified on the records of the file or the rows of the table.

Example from figure 5.1...*
For example, tuples in the STUDENT relation in Figure 5.1 could be
ordered by values of Name, Ssn, Age, or some other attribute.

Ordering of Values within a Tuple and an Alternative Definition of a Relation.

- According to the preceding definition of a relation, an n-tuple is an ordered list of n
values, so the ordering of values in a tuple—and hence of attributes in a relation
schema—is important. However, at a more abstract level, the order of attributes
and their values is not that important as long as the correspondence between attributes
and values is maintained.

- An alternative definition of a relation can be given, making the ordering of values
in a tuple unnecessary. In this definition, a relation schema R = {A1, A2, … , An} is a
set of attributes (instead of an ordered list of attributes), and a relation state r(R) is
a finite set of mappings r = {t1, t2, … , tm}, where each tuple ti is a mapping from R
to D, and D is the union (denoted by ∪) of the attribute domains; that is, D =
dom(A1) ∪ dom(A2) ∪ … ∪ dom(An). In this definition, t[Ai] must be in dom(Ai)
for 1 ≤ i ≤ n for each mapping t in r. Each mapping ti is called a tuple.

- According to this definition of tuple as a mapping, a tuple can be considered as a
set of (<attribute>, <value>) pairs, where each pair gives the value of the mapping
from an attribute Ai to a value vi from dom(Ai). The ordering of attributes is not
important, because the attribute name appears with its value.

example:
t = < (Name, Dick Davidson),(Ssn, 422-11-2320),(Home_phone, NULL),(Address, 3452 Elgin Road),
(Office_phone, (817)749-1253),(Age, 25),(Gpa, 3.53)>
t = < (Address, 3452 Elgin Road),(Name, Dick Davidson),(Ssn, 422-11-2320),(Age, 25),
(Office_phone, (817)749-1253),(Gpa, 3.53),(Home_phone, NULL)>


self-describing data*
- when the attribute value and name are included together in a tuple (description of each value (attribute name) is included in the tuple).

- We will mostly use the first definition of relation, where the attributes are ordered
in the relation schema and the values within tuples are similarly ordered, because it
simplifies much of the notation. However, the alternative definition given here is
more general.

Values and NULLs in the Tuples.
Each value in a tuple is an atomic value; that
is, it is not divisible into components within the framework of the basic relational
model. Hence, composite and multivalued attributes (see Chapter 3) are not
allowed. This model is sometimes called the flat relational model.

Most of the relational model was thought of with this in mind - first normal form assumption.

Hence, multivalued attributes
must be represented by separate relations,and composite attributes are represented
only by their simple component attributes in the basic relational model.

An important concept is that of NULL values, which are used to represent the values of
attributes that may be unknown or may not apply to a tuple. A special value, called
NULL, is used in these cases.

In general, we can have several meanings for NULL values, such as
value unknown, value exists but is not available, or attribute does not apply to this tuple
(also known as value undefined).

The exact meaning of a NULL value governs how it fares during arithmetic aggregations
or comparisons with other values. For example, a comparison of two NULL
values leads to ambiguities—if both Customer A and B have NULL addresses, it does
not mean they have the same address. During database design, it is best to avoid
NULL values as much as possible. We will discuss this further in Chapters 7 and 8 in
the context of operations and queries, and in Chapter 14 in the context of database
design and normalization.

Interpretation (Meaning) of a Relation.
can be interpreted as a declaration or type of assertion.

For example, the schema of the STUDENT
relation of Figure 5.1 asserts that, in general, a student entity has a Name, Ssn,
Home_phone, Address, Office_phone, Age, and Gpa.

Each tuple in the relation can
then be interpreted as a fact or a particular instance of the assertion.

Notice that some relations may represent facts about entities, whereas other relations
may represent facts about relationships*

Big Takeaway*
Hence, the relational model represents facts about both entities and relationships
uniformly as relations. (ER or E-ER model they are separate concepts).

Downside(s)
- This sometimes compromises understandability because
one has to guess whether a relation represents an entity type or a relationship type.

- An alternative interpretation of a relation schema is as a predicate; in this case, the
values in each tuple are interpreted as values that satisfy the predicate. For example,
the predicate STUDENT (Name, Ssn, …) is true for the five tuples in relation STUDENT
of Figure 5.1. These tuples represent five different propositions or facts in the
real world.

- An assumption called the closed world assumption
states that the only true facts in the universe are those present within the extension
(state) of the relation(s).


This interpretation of relations provides a foundation for understanding and utilizing relational databases, allowing for a structured representation of entities, relationships, and facts within a database system.
We will use the following notation in our presentation:
■ A relation schema R of degree n is denoted by R(A1, A2, … , An).
■ The uppercase letters Q, R, S denote relation names.
■ The lowercase letters q, r, s denote relation states.
■ The letters t, u, v denote tuples.
■ In general, the name of a relation schema such as STUDENT also indicates
the current set of tuples in that relation—the current relation state—whereas
STUDENT(Name, Ssn, …) refers only to the relation schema.
■ An attribute A can be qualified with the relation name R to which it belongs
by using the dot notation R.A—for example, STUDENT.Name or
STUDENT.Age. This is because the same name may be used for two attributes
in different relations. However, all attribute names in a particular
relation must be distinct.
■ An n-tuple t in a relation r(R) is denoted by t = <v1, v2, … , vn>, where vi is
the value corresponding to attribute Ai. The following notation refers to
component values of tuples:
 Both t[Ai] and t.Ai (and sometimes t[i]) refer to the value vi in t for attribute
Ai.
 Both t[Au, Aw, … , Az] and t.(Au, Aw, … , Az), where Au, Aw, … , Az is a list
of attributes from R, refer to the subtuple of values <vu, vw, … , vz> from t
corresponding to the attributes specified in the list.
As an example, consider the tuple t = <’Barbara Benson’, ‘533-69-1238’,
‘(817)839-8461’, ‘7384 Fontana Lane’, NULL, 19, 3.25> from the STUDENT relation in Figure
5.1; we have t[Name] = <‘Barbara Benson’>, and t[Ssn, Gpa, Age] = <‘533-69-1238’,
3.25, 19>.

5.2 Relational Model Constraints and Relational Database Schemas

There are generally many
restrictions or constraints on the actual values in a database state.

- model-based (implicit) constraints - Constraints that are inherent in the data model.

- schema-based constraints (explicit) constraints - Constraints that can be directly expressed in the schemas of the data model, typically
by specifying them in the DDL.

- application-based (semantic) constraints or business rules - constraints that cannot be directly expressed in the schemas of the data
model, and hence must be expressed and enforced by the application programs
or in some other way.

First section were model-based constraints.

Side note:
- data dependencies - Another important category of constraints (having to do with normalization).

This section is schema-based constraints (ones that can be specified by the DDL)*

Different schema-based constraints:
domain constraints, key constraints, constraints
on NULLs, entity integrity constraints, and referential integrity constraints.

5.2.1 Domain Constraints

Domain constraints specify that within each tuple, the value of each attribute A must
be an atomic value from the domain dom(A).

Can be classic data types, or subranges of classic data types.  Most generally they're defined by built in data types of the DDL (data definition language) in SQL.

5.2.2 Key Constraints and Constraints on NULL Values

In the formal relational model, a relation is defined as a set of tuples. By definition,
all elements of a set are distinct; hence, all tuples in a relation must also be distinct.

Must be distinct when all attributes are included.  Further, there are usually subsets of attributes we want this condition to hold for i.e. some subset of attributes with
the property that no two tuples in any relation state r of R should have the same
combination of values for these attributes.

Subset of attributes SK

any two distinct tuples t1, t2 - recall...

r(R) - relation state.
set of n-tuples t = {t1, t2, ..., tm}
where each t1 is a set of n-values v = {v1, v2, ..., vn}.

t1[SK] != t2[SK]

any set of such attributes SK is called a superkey of the relation schema R.
Superkeys specify a uniqueness constraint - no distinct tuples in any state r(R) can have the same value for SK.

Every relation has one default superkey? - Class what is it? (potential quiz question*)

Answer: The set of all it's attributes! (Superkeys can have redundant attributes).

keys have no redundancy! 

Key k of a relation schema R is a superkey of R with additional property that removing attribute A from K leaves a set of attributes K' that is not a superkey of R any more.

Satisfies two properties...

1. Two distinct tuples in any state of the relation cannot have identical values
for (all) the attributes in the key. This uniqueness property also applies to a
superkey.
2. It is a minimal superkey—that is, a superkey from which we cannot remove
any attributes and still have the uniqueness constraint hold. This minimality
property is required for a key but is optional for a superkey.

- Hence, a key is a superkey but not vice versa (quiz question)*

How can we use keys?

- The value of a key attribute can be used to identify uniquely each tuple in the relation.

- A set of attributes
constituting a key is a property of the relation schema;* it is a constraint that should
hold on every valid relation state of the schema. A key is determined from the meaning
of the attributes, and the property is time-invariant: It must continue to hold
when we insert new tuples in the relation. For example, we cannot and should not
designate the Name attribute of the STUDENT relation in Figure 5.1 as a key because
it is possible that two students with identical names will exist at some point in a
valid state.

In general, a relation schema can have more than one key (quiz question)* in that case each key is a candidate key.  It's common to designate one of the cadidate keys as a primary key of the relation (the candidate key used to identify tuples in a relation).

How to specify them in the relational schema

- We use the convention
that the attributes that form the primary key of a relation schema are underlined, as
shown in Figure 5.4.

How to choose from candidate keys to be primary keys (guidance)*

- better to choose a primary key with a single attribute or a small number
of attributes.

- The other candidate keys are designated as unique keys and are
not underlined.

5.2.3 Relational Databases and Relational
Database Schemas

definitions and constraints so far only apply to single relations and their attributes*
relational databases in general contain many relations, with tuples in relations that are related in various ways.

Definitions:
Relational Database Schema S set of relation schemas S = {R1, R2, ..., Rm} and set of integrity constraints IC.

Relational Database State DB of S is a set of relation states DB = {r1, r2, ..., rm} each ri is a state of Ri and such that ri relation state satisfies the integrity constraints specified in IC.

Relational Database Schema = COMPANY.
How many relation schemas?
i.e. COMPANY = {EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT,
DEPT_LOCATIONS, PROJECT, WORKS_ON, DEPENDENT}

- A database state that does not obey all the integrity constraints is called not valid.

- a state that satisfies all the constraints in the defined set of
integrity constraints IC is called a valid state.

Attribute Names in Relations:
Cases where attributes in different relations correspond to the same real world concept (i.e. the number given to a department in DEPARTMENT and DEPT_LOCATIONS relations).

May or may not have the same name in different relations (even though they correspond to the same real world concept).

Alternatively attributes that represent different concepts may have the same name in different relations (i.e. Name attribute in Both DEPARTMENT and EMPLOYEE relations).

Used to be assumption that would always share the same name if it corresponded to the same real world concept.  Do you see where this could be a problem?

Answer: In self referencing relations* i.e. remember in conceptual model with self referencing relationship we had to define roles each attribute plays (this roles are the different attribute names)*

i.e. EMPLOYEE relation SSN for the employee themselves, and SSN for their manager.
Must distinguish their meaning, do so by giving them different attribute names in the EMPLOYEE relation.

Relational DBMS' must have a DDL (Data definition language) for defining a relational database schema.  Most use SQL (next week)*

- Integrity constraints are specified on a database schema and are expected to hold on
every valid database state of that schema.

5.2.4 Entity Integrity, Referential Integrity, and Foreign Keys

Entity Integrity.
- entity integrity constraint: states that no primary key value can be NULL.

Why's that? (from your definition of a primary key)*
We have to use it to uniquely identify tuples.

May not be able to distinguish them if we try to reference from other relations.

Null values suggest we cannot identify tuples (may factor into choosing a primary key vs. candidate keys)*

- Key constraints and entity integrity constraints are specified on individual relations*

referential integrity constraint - specified between two relations and is used to
maintain the consistency among tuples in the two relations.

Informal: states that a tuple in one relation that refers to another relation
must refer to an existing tuple in that relation.

Formal definition:
foreign key - A set of attributes FK in relation schema R1 is a foreign key of R1 that references relation R2 if it satisfies the following rules:

1. The attributes in FK have the same domain(s) as the primary key attributes
PK of R2; the attributes FK are said to reference or refer to the relation R2.

2. A value of FK in a tuple t1 of the current state r1(R1) either occurs as a value
of PK for some tuple t2 in the current state r2(R2) or is NULL. In the former
case, we have t1[FK] = t2[PK], and we say that the tuple t1 references or
refers to the tuple t2.

If these two conditions hold, a referential integrity constraint from R1 to
R2 is said to hold.

Usually many referential integrity constraints in a database of many relations.

Referential integrity constraints typically arise from the
relationships among the entities represented by the relation schemas*

Value in the referencing relation must refer to an existing tuple, or be NULL (hasn't been assigned yet, or doesn't exist)*

Foreign key can refer to it's own relation*

- In this definition, R1 is called the referencing relation and R2 is the referenced
relation.

How to specify on the Relational Database Schema?

- We can diagrammatically display referential integrity constraints by drawing a directed
arc from each foreign key to the relation it references. For clarity, the arrowhead may
point to the primary key of the referenced relation.


All integrity constraints should be specified on the relational database schema (that is,
specified as part of its definition) if we want the DBMS to enforce these constraints on
the database states. Hence, the DDL includes provisions for specifying the various
types of constraints so that the DBMS can automatically enforce them.

In SQL, the
CREATE TABLE statement of the SQL DDL allows the definition of primary key,
unique key, NOT NULL, entity integrity, and referential integrity constraints, among
other constraints (see Sections 6.1 and 6.2) .

5.2.5 Other Types of Constraints

semantic integrity constraints - cannot be specified by the DDL of the database schema.

- the salary of an employee should not exceed the salary of the employee’s
supervisor and the maximum number of hours an employee can work on all projects
per week is 56.

Such constraints can be specified and enforced within the application
programs that update the database i.e. our API's :)

The types of constraints we discussed so far may be called state constraints
because they define the constraints that a valid state of the database must satisfy.

transition constraints - can be defined to deal
with state changes in the database.

i.e. the salary of an employee can only increase.

Typically enforced by application programs i.e. your API's.

5.3 Update Operations, Transactions,
and Dealing with Constraint Violations

operations can be categorized into retrievals and updates.

The relational algebra operations, which can be used to specify retrievals,
are discussed in detail in Chapter 8. A relational algebra expression forms a new
relation after applying a number of algebraic operators to an existing set of relations;
its main use is for querying a database to retrieve information. The user formulates
a query that specifies the data of interest, and a new relation is formed by
applying relational operators to retrieve this data. The result relation becomes the
answer to (or result of ) the user’s query.

- There are three basic operations that can change the states of relations in the database:
Insert, Delete, and Update (or Modify).




Domain, Key, Entity Integrity, Referential Integrity*

- They insert new data, delete old data,
or modify existing data records, respectively.

What constraints can be violated on an insert?
Insert can violate any of the four types of constraints.

Let's try to come up with an example for each*

- The Insert operation provides a list of attribute values for a new tuple t that is to be
inserted into a relation R. Insert can violate any of the four types of constraints.
Domain constraints can be violated if an attribute value is given that does not
appear in the corresponding domain or is not of the appropriate data type. Key
constraints can be violated if a key value in the new tuple t already exists in another
tuple in the relation r(R). Entity integrity can be violated if any part of the primary
key of the new tuple t is NULL. Referential integrity can be violated if the value of
any foreign key in t refers to a tuple that does not exist in the referenced relation.

If an insertion violates one or more constraints, default option is to reject the insertion.
Useful if the DBMS could provide a reason to the user why the operation was rejected.

another option is to try and correct it, but this is not generally used for inserts*

- In the first operation, the DBMS could ask the user to provide a value for Ssn, and
could then accept the insertion if a valid Ssn value is provided. In operation 3, the
DBMS could either ask the user to change the value of Dno to some valid value
(or set it to NULL), or it could ask the user to insert a DEPARTMENT tuple with
Dnumber = 7 and could accept the original insertion only after such an operation
was accepted. Notice that in the latter case the insertion violation can cascade back
to the EMPLOYEE relation if the user attempts to insert a tuple for department 7 with
a value for Mgr_ssn that does not exist in the EMPLOYEE relation.

5.3.2 The Delete Operation
What constraints can be violated for Delete?

can only violate referential integrity.This occurs if the tuple
being deleted is referenced by foreign keys from other tuples in the database.

Several options are available if a deletion operation causes a violation.

- The first option, called restrict, is to reject the deletion.

- The second option, called cascade, is
to attempt to cascade (or propagate) the deletion by deleting tuples that reference the
tuple that is being deleted.

- A third option, called set null or set default, is to modify the referencing attribute
values that cause the violation; each such value is either set to NULL or changed to reference another default valid tuple.

- Notice that if a referencing attribute that
causes a violation is part of the primary key, it cannot be set to NULL; otherwise, it
would violate entity integrity (quiz question)*

You can use combinations of these options for dealing with violating referential integrity.

In general, when a referential integrity constraint is specified in the DDL, the DBMS
will allow the database designer to specify which of the options applies in case of a
violation of the constraint.

5.3.3 The Update Operation
What constraints can be violated for Delete?

Updating an attribute that is neither part of a primary key nor part of a foreign key
usually causes no problems; only has to check for domain constraint to be violated.

Modifying a primary key value is similar
to deleting one tuple and inserting another in its place because we use the primary
key to identify tuples. Hence, the issues discussed earlier in both Sections 5.3.1
(Insert) and 5.3.2 (Delete) come into play.

Modifying a foreign key attribute, the DBMS must make sure that the new value refers to an existing tuple in the referenced
relation (or is set to NULL).

Similar options exist to deal with referential integrity
violations caused by Update as those options discussed for the Delete operation.
In fact, when a referential integrity constraint is specified in the DDL, the DBMS will
allow the user to choose separate options to deal with a violation caused by Delete
and a violation caused by Update

5.3.4 The Transaction Concept
A transaction is an executing program that includes
some database operations, such as reading from the database, or applying insertions,
deletions, or updates to the database. At the end of the transaction, it must
leave the database in a valid or consistent state that satisfies all the constraints specified
on the database schema. A single transaction may involve any number of
retrieval operations (to be discussed as part of relational algebra and calculus in
Chapter 8, and as a part of the language SQL in Chapters 6 and 7) and any number
of update operations. These retrievals and updates will together form an atomic
unit of work against the database.